docs: Passkey (#6110)
zitadel/zitadel: docs/docs/guides/integrate/login-ui/passkey.mdx

---
title: Handle Passkey Registration and Login
sidebar_label: Passkey
---

Passkeys are a replacement for passwords that provide faster, easier, and more secure sign-ins to websites and apps across a user’s devices.
It is based on the [FIDO Standard](https://fidoalliance.org/).
Unlike passwords, passkeys are always strong and phishing-resistant.

## Flow

> ![Passkey Registration and Login Flow](/img/guides/login-ui/passkey-flow.png)

Author: Yes would make sense to split it. Will do.

Let's add it for now with the current graphigs, and I will have a look at mermaid afterwards. I will then replace all the flows in the login ui guide in one pr.

> There are two different possibilities when you like to enable passkey for your user.
> 1. You send the user a notification with a code so the user is able to register passkey on another device
> 2. You start the passkey registration directly on the device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two options to onboard users with passkeys:
1. You send the user a link (email, sms, ...) with an embedded code, so the user is able to register passkey on any capable device
2. You start the passkey registration directly on the current device used by a user
```

## Send Registration Link

> When you want to send a link to your user, that enables him to register a new passkey device, you can let ZITADEL send the code or return it in the response so you can send a message by yourself.
> 
> Make sure to also include the URL Template to customize the reset link in the email sent to the user, in case of ZITADEL sending the email.a
> 
> [Send Registration Link Documentation](/apis/resources/user_service/user-service-create-passkey-registration-link)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you want to send a link to your user, that enables him to register a new passkey device, you can choose if ZITADEL sends the code or ZITADEL can return the code in the API response. This way you can send a link through any channel of your choice (email, sms, phone, in-person, postal, ...).

Make sure to include the URL Template that customizes the reset link in the email, in case of ZITADEL sending the email.

[Send Registration Link Documentation](/apis/resources/user_service/user-service-create-passkey-registration-link)
```

Reviewer: I do not really understand 
"Make sure to include the URL Template that customizes the reset link in the email, in case of ZITADEL sending the email."

Can you explain what this means?

Reviewer: Ok I tweaked the sentence slightly, feel free to add additional context, i.e do we have some definition of what values are available?

> ### Request

Reviewer: "Request device registration link/code" might be more clear

Author: Request Example?

Reviewer: Ok lets go this way, if we need them as anchor i would use request/response otherwise i would use only a text that explains what happens.

```bash
curl --request POST \
  --url https://$ZITADEL_DOMAIN/v2alpha/users/$USER_ID/passkeys/registration_link \
  --header 'Accept: application/json' \
  --header 'Authorization: Bearer '"$TOKEN"''\
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
   "sendLink": {

>       "urlTemplate": "https://example.com/passkey/register?userID={{.UserID}}&orgID={{.OrgID}}&codeID={{.CodeID}}&code={{.Code}}"

Reviewer: Do we explain this somewhere?

Author: thats the one mentioned above

Reviewer: ok

   },

>    "returnCode": {}

Reviewer: Does this tell zitadel to return a code instead of send a link?
Or what is the meaning of this?

Author: yes, its actually a one of. either the sendLink or the returnCode, returnCode is an empty message. 
I can include that in the text, to make it more clear

Reviewer: I think we should do this, otherwise people are getting confused 😁

}'
```

> ## Response in case of return code

Reviewer: I think "Successful code response" would sound more elegant

Author: Its the response, when requesting the return code. The response doesn't look like this when asking ZITADEL for sending the code

Reviewer: https://github.com/zitadel/zitadel/pull/6110/files#r1246328228

> ## Response in case of return code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Response successful code request
```

In that case this might sound more clear

```bash
{
	"details": {
		"sequence": "632",
		"changeDate": "2023-06-28T08:09:51.257699Z",
		"resourceOwner": "163840776835432705"
	},
	"code": {
		"id": "220526087715684609",
		"code": "2KEpIeQGSBBd"
	}
}
```

> ## Start Passkey Registration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Start Passkey registration
```

Author: I think we normally do uppercase in the headings.

Reviewer: Do we?

I thought we switched to only first character's and names uppercase.

Author: At least thats how dakshitha did review my first guide on the login api.
She did everything despite filler words uppercase.
eg. Start the Provider Flow, Register User with Password

But it doesn't matter for me. :)

> When starting the passkey registration you can optionally send the code from the step before, if you have sent the code to the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When starting the passkey registration you can optionally send the registration code from the step above to ZITADEL to pair it with a specific user.
```

> By specifying the authenticator you can choose if the passkey should be cross paltform or not. Per default everything is allowed:
> - PASSKEY_AUTHENTICATOR_UNSPECIFIED
> - PASSKEY_AUTHENTICATOR_PLATFORM
> - PASSKEY_AUTHENTICATOR_CROSS_PLATFORM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By specifying the authenticator type you can choose if the passkey should be cross platform or not. Per default all types are allowed:
- PASSKEY_AUTHENTICATOR_UNSPECIFIED
- PASSKEY_AUTHENTICATOR_PLATFORM
- PASSKEY_AUTHENTICATOR_CROSS_PLATFORM
```

> In the response you will get the public key credential options, that will be obtained by the browser to use the physical key to obtain a signed challenge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API response you will provide you the public key credential options, this will be used by the browser to obtain a signed challenge.
```

> [Start Passkey Registration Documentation](/apis/resources/user_service/user-service-register-passkey)

Reviewer: What should a reader do with this link? Does it explain something specific?

Author: Its the link to the api docs

Author: will add a text

> ### Request

Reviewer: Can we make this heading more clear?
What is requested here?

Author: I removed the request headings and just wrote example request:

```bash
curl --request POST \
  --url https://$ZITADEL_DOMAIN/v2alpha/users/$USER_ID/passkeys \
  --header 'Accept: application/json' \
  --header 'Authorization: Bearer '"$TOKEN"''\
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
	"code": {
		"id": "220526087715684609",
		"code": "2KEpIeQGSBBd"
	},
  "authenticator": "PASSKEY_AUTHENTICATOR_UNSPECIFIED"
}'
```

> ### Response

Reviewer: Can we make this heading more clear?

```bash
{
	"details": {
		"sequence": "633",
		"changeDate": "2023-06-28T08:10:26.725981Z",
		"resourceOwner": "163840776835432705"
	},
	"passkeyId": "220526147258024193",
	"publicKeyCredentialCreationOptions": {
		"publicKey": {
			"attestation": "none",
			"authenticatorSelection": {
				"userVerification": "required"
			},
			"challenge": "JM1uLbVQR2xZJ210DA7E-3j0Cd9rHKUSmc8NyIJBtAY",
			"pubKeyCredParams": [
				{
					"alg": -7,
					"type": "public-key"
				},
				{
					"alg": -35,
					"type": "public-key"
				},
				{
					"alg": -36,
					"type": "public-key"
				},
				{
					"alg": -257,
					"type": "public-key"
				},
				{
					"alg": -258,
					"type": "public-key"
				},
				{
					"alg": -259,
					"type": "public-key"
				},
				{
					"alg": -37,
					"type": "public-key"
				},
				{
					"alg": -38,
					"type": "public-key"
				},
				{
					"alg": -39,
					"type": "public-key"
				},
				{
					"alg": -8,
					"type": "public-key"
				}
			],
			"rp": {

> 				"id": "fabi-t7rlmd.zitadel.app",

Reviewer: Do we want to keep this domain here?

Author: No I change it to make it clear it is an example

				"name": "ZITADEL"
			},
			"timeout": 300000,
			"user": {
				"displayName": "Minnie Mouse",
				"id": "MjE4NjYyNTk2OTE4NjQwODk3",

> 				"name": "minni-mouse@mouse.com@fabi.zitadel.app"

Reviewer: I think this could confuse people since it has two @ in it.

Author: changed

			}
		}
	}
}
```

> ## Register in Browser

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Register new Passkey on current device
```

Now that you have started the registration within ZITADEL, you have to register the credentials in the browser.
This requires a call to the browser api and looks something like the following.
Make sure to send the public key credential creation options you got in the previous request from ZITADEL.

```bash
const credential = await navigator.credentials.create({
    publicKey: publicKeyCredentialCreationOptions
});
```

For more information about WebAuthN and registering credential flow, read the following guide:
[Registering a WebAuthN Credentials](https://webauthn.guide/#registration)

### Verify Passkey in ZITADEL

In the next request you have to verify the Passkey within ZITADEL.
Include the public key credential you got from the browser in your request.

> Also you can give the Passkey a name, which makes it easier for the user to identify the registered authentication methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can give the Passkey a name, which makes it easier for the user to identify the registered authentication methods.
```

> Example: Google Pixel, iPhone, Mac Book, etc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: Google Pixel, iCloud Keychain, Yubikey, etc
```

    "response": {
      "attestationObject": "o2NmbXRmcGFja2VkZ2F0dFN0bXSiY2FsZyZjc2lnWEcwRQIgRKS3VpeE9tfExXRzkoUKnG4rQWPvtSSt4YtDGgTx32oCIQDPey-2YJ4uIg-QCM4jj6aE2U3tgMFM_RP7Efx6xRu3JGhhdXRoRGF0YVikSZYN5YgOjGh0NBcPZHZgW4_krrmihjLHmVzzuoMdl2NFAAAAADju76085Yhmlt1CEOHkwLQAIKWsFWqxeMT8SxZnwp0ZMF1nk6yhs2m3AIvdixCNVgtNpQECAyYgASFYIMGUDSP2FAQn2MIfPMy7cyB_Y30VqixVgGULTBtFjfRiIlggjUGfQo3_-CrMmH3S-ZQkFKWKnNBQEAMkFtG-9A4zqW0",
      "clientDataJSON": "eyJ0eXBlIjoid2ViYXV0aG4uY3JlYXRlIiwiY2hhbGxlbmdlIjoiQlhXdHh0WGxJeFZZa0pHT1dVaUVmM25zby02aXZKdWw2YmNmWHdMVlFIayIsIm9yaWdpbiI6Imh0dHBzOi8vbG9jYWxob3N0OjgwODAifQ"
    }
  },
  "passkeyName": "fido key"
}'
```

You have successfully registered a new passkey to the user.
Next step is to authenticate the user with the new registered passkey.

## Create Session

First step is to ask the user for his username and create a new session with the ZITADEL API.
When creating the new session make sure to include the challenge for passkey.
The response will include the public key credential request options for the passkey in the challenges.

[Create Session Documentation](/apis/resources/session_service/session-service-create-session)

> ### Request

Reviewer: Can we make this heading more clear?

```bash
curl --request POST \
  --url https://$ZITADEL_DOMAIN/v2alpha/sessions \
  --header 'Accept: application/json' \
  --header 'Authorization: Bearer '"$TOKEN"''\
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
  "checks": {
    "user": {

>       "loginName": "minni-mouse@mouse.com@fabi.zitadel.app"

Reviewer: This username can confuse people I would tweak this

Author: ```suggestion
      "loginName": "minni-mouse@mouse.com"
```

    }
  },
  "metadata": {},
  "challenges": [
    "CHALLENGE_KIND_PASSKEY"
  ]
}'
```

> ### Response

Reviewer: Can we make this heading more clear?

```bash
{
  "details": {
    "sequence": "2",
    "changeDate": "2023-06-27",
    "resourceOwner": "69629023906488334"
  },
  "sessionId": "d654e6ba-70a3-48ef-a95d-37c8d8a7901a",
  "sessionToken": "string",
  "challenges": {
    "passkey": {
      "publicKeyCredentialRequestOptions": {
        "publicKey": {
          "allowCredentials": [
            {
              "id": "ATmqBg-99qyOZk2zloPdJQyS2R7IkFT7v9Hoos_B_nM",
              "type": "public-key"
            }
          ],
          "challenge": "GAOHYz2jE69kJMYo6Laij8yWw9-dKKgbViNhfuy0StA",

>           "rpId": "localhost",

Reviewer: This does not align with the value above and could confuse people.

Let's settle on one domain to be used in the example

Author: changed

          "timeout": 300000,
          "userVerification": "required"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Signing in Browser

> After starting the passkey authentication on the side of ZITADEL you have to verify in the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After starting the passkey authentication on the side of ZITADEL you have to challenge the browser.
```

To do this you need to call the browser API to get the credentials.
Make sure to send the public key credential request options you got from ZITADEL.

```bash
const credential = await navigator.credentials.get({
    publicKey: publicKeyCredentialRequestOptions
});
```

Read the [WebAuthN Guide](https://webauthn.guide/#authentication) for more information about "Authenticating with a WebAuthN Credential".

### Update Session with Passkey

Now that you have successfully authenticated in the browser, you can update the session of the user.
Fill the passkey checks with the credential assertion data you get from the browser.

[Update Session Documentation](/apis/resources/session_service/session-service-set-session)

> ### Request

Reviewer: Can we make this heading more clear?

Author: Like this? Or should we just remove the heading?

```suggestion
### Request Example
```
